---
layout: post
title:  "Run IT++ under FC4"
date:   2005-09-14
tags: Fedora IT++
---
IT++ is a C++ library of mathematical, signal processing, speech processing, and communications classes and functions. You can download it for free from https://sourceforge.net/project/showfiles.php?group_id=37044, and its docs from http://itpp.sourceforge.net/latest/. When compling this library under Windows, you should have Intel(R) MKL installed, and a VC++ compiler(vs.net 2k3). Under Linux, for better performance, you also should download it++external. Particulary under FC4, you should have the compat-gcc-32-3.2.3-47.fc4.i386.rpm, compat-gcc-32-g77-3.2.3-47.fc4.i386.rpm, and compat-libf2c-32-3.2.3-47.fc4.i386.rpm installed. Those rpms are packages required for g77 Fortran programs’ compling. When those packages prepared, decompress it++external to some directory, and ./configure, make. That should be OK. After compling it++external, create a symbolic link from it++external.a(you can find that file in lib/Linux_arch/gcc4.0.1) to the lib subdirectory where you decompressed it++. Then, enter the it++ directory, ./configure, make. There should be no problem. When you get the libit++.a in the lib subdirectory, things are not done yet. Entering the tests subdirectory, and make, you will get lots of errors. That is the problem cuase by the Makefile and the it-config script. So lets modify those two files to accomplish our task:
1) in the Makefile, just remove the "–debug" from the lines containing FLAGS and LIBS;
2) in the it-config, replace "-lg2c" with "/usr/lib/libg2c.so.0".
Yes, libg2c.a is an old GNU library for fortran to C’s conversion, in newer version of gcc, a shared library(.so) is used instead. Ok, when finishing the modification, enter tests, and make. Bingo! Everything compiled successfully. What to do next? Err, yes, try the tutorial codes in http://itpp.sourceforge.net/latest/tutorial.html. Remember, thoese codes are incorrect, you should add "using namespace itpp;" within the beginning serveral lines. And the compling command should be something like "g++ -I/usr/src/it++3.8.1/include the_sample_code.cpp -o the_sample_code -L/usr/src/it++3.8.1/lib -lit++ -lit++external /usr/lib/libg2c.so.0". Ok, and for plotting curves, we need “yum install octave”. For example, after building the write_it_file.cpp provided in http://itpp.sourceforge.net/latest/itfile.html, you get it_file_test.it. Then, in a console box, enter "octave", change currenct directory to where the it_file_test.it is located, and copy the files in matlab subdirectory of it++ to current directory; enter command: load_it("it_file_test.it")[be sure not to forget the double quotation mark!], you will have that result vector "a" in workspace:
who

*** currently compiled functions:

isstr            load_it          load_it:fgetstr  strcmp

*** local user variables:

__nargin__  a
You can plot the result now: plot(a);

For convenient compling, I wrote a bash script "itmake" here:
{% highlight shell %}
g++ -I/usr/root/src/it++3.8.1/include $1 -o $2 -L/usr/src/it++3.8.1/lib -lit++ -it++external /usr/lib/libg2c.so.0

Usage: itmake cpp_filename output_filename
{% endhighlight %}

PS: After installing octave using yum, I found some of external libraries included in it++external are installed: lapack,  fftw3. Maybe I should link it++external.a with the official provided /usr/lib/liblapack.a and /usr/lib/libfftw3.so.3...
