---
layout: post
title:  "How to build C++ libraries"
date:   2006-03-09
tags: gcc C++
---
# Static Library

1. In msvc, you can use "cl /c" to generate some obj files, and "lib /out:lib_name.lib \*.obj". Be sure to link the file that references to our library with the same complier options as the lib file, or you will get some LNK2005. The most trikcy part is, ms use different runtime librariy for different muilti-threaded configuration, so to use the IDE generated lib file, be sure to check the "Runtime Library" option in the "project property->Configuration Properties->C/C++->Code Geration" page. To link to the lib file, just add a reference in the "Commen Properites->References" page; or you can use "cl cpp_file_name.cpp lib_name.lib" in cmd line.  
*MSDN*
If building from the command line, you must build the program in two steps.
1) compile the code using Cl.exe with the /c compiler option (cl /c /EHsc MathFuncsLib.cpp). This will create an object file named MathFuncsLib.obj. For more information, see /c (Compile Without Linking).
2) link the code using the Library Manager Lib.exe (lib MathFuncsLib.obj). This will create the static library MathFuncsLib.lib. For more information on the Library Manager, see LIB Reference.
*My steps*
1) include the header file
2) to reference to a source-less dll, you should add the corresponding lib file to the "Additional Dependencies" in "project property->configuration properties->linker->input"
or write the following progma derectives in the program
    ```c
    #pragma comment(lib, "lib_name")
    ```
3) set the "project property->configuration properties->debugging->Environment"

1. In gcc, one can use "gcc -c" to gererate the .o files, and "ar rcvs lib_name.a *.o". Then "gcc -lname." The -lname should not be written as "-llibname.lib" but "-lname"!

# Dynamic Link Library

1. MSDN says: If building from the command line, use the /LD compiler option to specify that the output file should be a DLL. For more information, see /MD, /MT, /LD (Use Run-Time Library).

2. from: http://www.mingw.org/mingwfaq.shtml#faq-msvcdll
How can an MSVC program call a MinGW DLL, and vice versa?
Assume we have a testdll.h, testdll.c, and testmain.c. In the first case, we will compile testdll.c with MinGW, and let the MSVC-compiled testmain call it. You should use
    ```shell
    gcc -shared -o testdll.dll testdll.c \
        -Wl,–output-def,testdll.def,–out-implib,libtestdll.a
    ```
to produce the DLL and DEF files. MSVC cannot use the MinGW library, but since you have already the DEF file you may easily produce one by the Microsoft LIB tool:
    ```shell
    lib /machine:i386 /def:testdll.def
    ```
Once you have testdll.lib, it is trivial to produce the executable with MSVC:
    ```shell
    cl testmain.c testdll.lib
    ```
Now for MinGW programs calling an MSVC DLL. We have two methods. One way is to specify the LIB files directly on the command line after the main program. For example, after
    ```shell
    cl /LD testdll.c
    ```
use
    ```shell
    gcc -o testmain testmain.c testdll.lib
    ```
The other way is to produce the .a files for GCC. For __cdecl functions (in most cases), it is simple: you only need to apply the reimp tool from Anders Norlander (since his web site is no longer available, you may choose to download here a version enhanced by Jose Fonseca):
    ```shell
    reimp testdll.lib
    gcc -o testmain testmain.c -L. -ltestdll
    ```
However, for __stdcall functions, the above method does not work. For MSVC will prefix an underscore to __stdcall functions while MinGW will not. The right way is to produce the DEF file using the pexports tool included in the mingw-utils package and filter off the first underscore by sed:
    ```shell
    pexports testdll.dll | sed "s/^_//" > testdll.def
    ```
Then, when using dlltool to produce the import library, add `-U’ to the command line:
    ```shell
    dlltool -U -d testdll.def -l libtestdll.a
    ```
And now, you can proceed in the usual way:
    ```shell
    gcc -o testmain testmain.c -L. -ltestdll
    ```
