---
layout: post
title:  "The AD1986a problem"
date:   2007-04-15
tags: Linux
---
http://forums.suselinuxsupport.de/lofiversion/index.php/t50985.html

    Azalia Adi1986a Weird Problem With Suse 10.2
    ttuee2006
    Feb 11 2007, 08:36 PM

    Maybe this has been posted before, but I cannot find it using the search function on the forum.

    The problem I’m having is that the audio does not work properly after a
    default installation of OpenSuse 10.2. The audio seems to work properly
    on the right channel, but not on the left. All I get on the left
    channel is a loud screeching noise followed by a pop when the audio
    turns off.

    The system configuration is as follows:

    Asus P5L-MX Motherboard (i945G chipset)
    1 GB DDR2-667 RAM
    nVidia GeForce 7600GT
    Audio is integrated: Azalia ADI1986A, 6-channel High-Definition Audio CODEC

    Before, i’ve always used a dedicated sound card, so this is my first time to try using the integrated sound.

    Any suggestions? Things to try? Stuff to install? So far this is my only
    stumbling block. All other hardware worked without a hitch! Fairly
    impressive if I must say so….
    ttuee2006
    Feb 11 2007, 10:57 PM

    I should point out that I made a boo-boo earlier. The chip in the computer is an Analog Devices AD1986a chip.
    Blitz23
    Mar 13 2007, 02:56 AM

    QUOTE(ttuee2006 @ Feb 11 2007, 03:57 PM)
    I should point out that I made a boo-boo earlier. The chip in the computer is an Analog Devices AD1986a chip.

    I’m having the same problem as you’ve described, except with an Asus
    P5VDC-X. In the past I’ve used a PCI sound card, Sound Blaster, with no
    difficulty, this my first time trying to get the Asus integrated Analog
    Devices AD1986A chip working with SuSE 10.2. The PCI Sound Blaster
    works perfectly, but not the integrated Analog Devices AD1986A chip on
    the Asus P5VDC-X. I’ve been searching on the net for some time tonight,
    but I come up with nothing.

    If you’ve managed to get yours
    working, please post here so we can see your solution. I found a number
    of people with somewhat similar problems with the Analog Devices
    AD1986A chip on different motherboards, but no real solution that I was
    able to find. On the Analog Devices site they say they support Linux,
    but I can’t locate any drivers for this chip.

    Thanks!
    Blitz23
    Mar 13 2007, 07:03 AM

    QUOTE(Blitz23 @ Mar 12 2007, 08:56 PM)
    I’m having the same problem as you’ve described, except with an Asus
    P5VDC-X. In the past I’ve used a PCI sound card, Sound Blaster, with no
    difficulty, this my first time trying to get the Asus integrated Analog
    Devices AD1986A chip working with SuSE 10.2. The PCI Sound Blaster
    works perfectly, but not the integrated Analog Devices AD1986A chip on
    the Asus P5VDC-X. I’ve been searching on the net for some time tonight,
    but I come up with nothing.

    If you’ve managed to get yours
    working, please post here so we can see your solution. I found a number
    of people with somewhat similar problems with the Analog Devices
    AD1986A chip on different motherboards, but no real solution that I was
    able to find. On the Analog Devices site they say they support Linux,
    but I can’t locate any drivers for this chip.

    Thanks!

    UPDATE!!!

    Long story short, I put back in my stand alone PCI Sound Blaster card. I
    hadn’t noticed before it also supports 5 speakers, one the sub-woofer,
    and surround, etc. It sounds great on this Altec Lansing ADA745 speaker
    system I found cheap in a yard sale today, just about new, in fact, it
    sounds really great. And KMix is handling all of the settings
    perfectly, I have Alsa loaded via Yast, and also Yast has the drivers
    in Hardware for this sound card.

    FYI: The Asus site has Linux
    drivers for the AD1986A chip on some of their boards (I found it late
    tonight, well, very early the next morning now). However, I decided to
    shelve for now using this integrated sound chip on the Asus
    motherboard. I now have it disabled in BIOS. The more I looked at the
    AD1986A chip driver and started to install it, the more involved it was
    getting for this particular sound chip, and as I had mentioned others
    had some problems with it unless I guess using Vista… Ugh!!! So, the
    PCI Sound Blaster card is working perfectly for my setup here.
    setuid
    Mar 25 2007, 09:12 PM

    hey… the alsa driver have a problem

    In file hda_codec.c the line 1727 is: if (codec->bus->modelname && models) {
    the variable codec->bus->modelname not is reconized for asus pc5vdc-x
    motherboards. Your ship is "Analog Devices AD1986A"

    i make a patch…

    http://www.inf.ufg.br/~sergiodaniel/alsa-driver-1.0.14_PATCH_rc3-p5vdc-x.tar.gz

    tar -zxvf alsa-driver-1.0.14_PATCH_rc3-p5vdc-x.tar.gz

    # cd alsa*
    # ./configure
    # make
    # make install
    # alsaconf
    # alsamixer

    adjust the volume control... and... have a nice sound!
