---
layout: post
title:  "chcp"
date:   2008-08-06
tags: Windows
---
I was working in a cmd.exe window for different language these days. You can image, lots of unrecognized characters appeared in the cmd window. I found that current code page is not editable in the 'Properties' dialog, so I had to change my region to different ones and reboot my Windows, which is a great pain.
 
I happened to google 'how to change code page in cmd.exe', and I got a command: chcp code_page_number. Here is the possible ones.
IBM PC (OEM) code pages

These code pages are most often used under MS-DOS-like operating systems. They include a lot of box drawing characters. Since the original IBM PC code page (number 437) was not really designed for international use, several incompatible variants emerged. Microsoft refers to these as the OEM code pages. Examples include:

    437 — The original IBM PC code page
    737 — Greek
    775 — Estonian, Lithuanian and Latvian
    850 — "Multilingual (Latin-1)" (Western European languages)
    852 — "Slavic (Latin-2)" (Eastern European languages)
    855 — Cyrillic
    857 — Turkish
    858 — "Multilingual" with euro symbol
    860 — Portuguese
    861 — Icelandic
    862 — Hebrew
    863 — French Canadian
    865 — Nordic
    866 — Cyrillic
    869 — Greek

In modern applications, operating systems and programming languages, the IBM code pages have been rendered obsolete by newer & better international standards, such as Unicode.

Other code pages of note

The following code page numbers are specific to Microsoft Windows. IBM uses different numbers for these code pages.

    10000 — Macintosh Roman encoding (followed by several other Mac character sets)
    10007 — Macintosh Cyrillic encoding
    10029 — Macintosh Central European encoding
    932 — Supports Japanese
    936 — GBK Supports Simplified Chinese
    949 — Supports Korean
    950 — Supports Traditional Chinese
    1200 — UCS-2LE Unicode little-endian
    1201 — UCS-2BE Unicode big-endian
    65000 — UTF-7 Unicode
    65001 — UTF-8 Unicode
    ASMO449+ — Supports Arabic
    MIK — Supports Bulgarian and Russian as well

Windows (ANSI) code pages

Microsoft defined a number of code pages known as the ANSI code pages (as the first one, 1252 was based on an apocryphal ANSI draft of what became ISO 8859-1). Code page 1252 is built on ISO 8859-1 but uses the range 0x80-0x9F for extra printable characters rather than the C1 control codes used in ISO-8859-1. Some of the others are based in part on other parts of ISO 8859 but often rearranged to make them closer to 1252.

    1250 — East European Latin
    1251 — Cyrillic
    1252 — West European Latin
    1253 — Greek
    1254 — Turkish
    1255 — Hebrew
    1256 — Arabic
    1257 — Baltic
    1258 — Vietnamese
